releases: add tidb v7.0.0 release notes (#12941)
pingcap/docs: releases/release-7.0.0.md

## Compatibility changes

> **Note:**
>
> This section provides compatibility changes you need to know when you upgrade from v6.6.0 to the current version (v7.0.0). If you are upgrading from v6.5.0 or earlier versions to the current version, you might also need to check the compatibility changes introduced in intermediate versions.

### MySQL compatibility

* TiDB 支持移除自增列必须是索引的约束 [#40580](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40580) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) **tw:ran-huang**

    TiDB v7.0.0 开始支持移除自增列必须是索引或索引前缀的限制。这意味着用户现在可以更灵活地定义表的主键，并方便地使用自增列实现排序分页，同时避免自增列带来的写入热点问题，并通过使用 Cluster Indexed Table 提高查询性能。之前，TiDB 的行为与 MySQL 一致，要求自增列必须是索引或索引前缀。现在，通过此次更新，您可以使用以下语法创建表并成功移除自增列约束：

    ```sql
    create table test1 (
        `id` int(11) NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
        `k` int(11) NOT NULL DEFAULT '0',
        `c` char(120) COLLATE utf8mb4_unicode_ci NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
        PRIMARY KEY(`k`, `id`)
    );
    ```

    此功能不影响 TiCDC 同步数据。

    For more information, see [documentation]().

* 兼容性 2

### System variables

| Variable name  | Change type    | Description |
|--------|------------------------------|------|

> | [`tidb_enable_null_aware_anti_join`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_null_aware_anti_join-new-in-v630) | Modified | Changes the default value from `OFF` to `ON` after further tests, meaning that TiDB applies Null-Aware Hash Join when Anti Join is generated by subqueries led by special set operators `NOT IN` and `!= ALL` by default. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache) | Modified | Takes effect starting from v7.0.0 and controls whether to enable the [Non-prepared plan cache](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md) feature. |
| [`tidb_enable_null_aware_anti_join`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_null_aware_anti_join-new-in-v630) | Modified | Changes the default value from `OFF` to `ON` after further tests, meaning that TiDB applies Null-Aware Hash Join when Anti Join is generated by subqueries led by special set operators `NOT IN` and `!= ALL` by default. |
| [`tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size) | Modified | Takes effect starting from v7.0.0 and controls the maximum number of execution plans that can be cached by [Non-prepared plan cache](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md). |
```

  For more information, see [documentation](/optimizer-hints.md).

* 优化器 Hint 兼容连接方式与连接顺序的指定 [#36600](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/36600) @[Reminiscent](https://github.com/Reminiscent)

    在 v7.0.0 中，优化器 Hint [`LEADING()`](/optimizer-hints.md#leadingt1_name--tl_name-) 能够和影响连接方式的 Hint 配合使用，两者行为兼容。 这样在多表连接的情况下，可以有效指定最佳的连接方式和连接顺序，提升优化器 Hint 对执行计划的控制能力。

    新的 Hint 行为会有微小的变化。 为确保向前兼容，TiDB 引入了变量 [`tidb_opt_advanced_join_hint`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_advanced_join_hint-从-v700-版本开始引入)， 当此变量为 `OFF` 时，行为向前兼容。 从旧版本升级到 v7.0.0 及之后版本的集群，该变量会被设置成 `OFF`。为了获取更灵活的 Hint 行为，强烈建议在确保无性能回退的情况下，将该变量切换为 `ON`。

    For more information, see [documentation](/optimizer-hints.md).

### Availability

* TiDB 支持 prefer-leader 选项，在网络不稳定的情况下提供更高的读可用性，降低响应延迟 [#40905](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40905) @[LykxSassinator](https://github.com/LykxSassinator) **tw:ran-huang**

    TiDB 支持通过 `tidb_replica_read` 参数控制 TiDB 的数据读取行为，新增支持 `prefer-leader` 选项。当设置为 `prefer-leader` 时，TiDB 会优先选择 leader 副本执行读取操作。当 leader 副本的处理速度明显变慢时，例如由于磁盘或网络性能抖动，TiDB 将选择其他可用的 follower 副本来执行读取操作，从而提供更高的可用性，降低响应延迟。

    For more information, see [documentation](/develop/dev-guide-use-follower-read.md).

### SQL

> 
> * MySQL 兼容的多值索引 (Multi-Valued Index) GA [#39592](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39592) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw:ran-huang**
> 
>     过滤 JSON 列中某个数组的值是常见的操作，但普通索引对这类操作起不到加速作用。在数组上创建多值索引能够大幅提升过滤的性能。如果 JSON 列中的某个数组上存在多值索引，那么可以利用多值索引过滤带有 `MEMBER OF()`、`JSON_CONTAINS()`、`JSON_OVERLAPS()` 函数的检索条件，从而减少大量的 I/O 消耗，提升运行速度。
> 
>     在 v7.0.0 中， TiDB 多值索引 (Multi-Valued Index) 支持更多的数据类型，并与 TiDB 的工具链兼容， 这个功能 GA ，支持用户在生成环境中利用“多值索引”加速对 JSON 数组的检索操作。
> 
>     For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#多值索引).

Author: ```suggestion
```

   
    With this feature, you can combine multiple small and medium-sized applications from different systems into a single TiDB cluster. When the workload of an application grows larger, it does not affect the normal operation of other applications. When the system workload is low, busy applications can still be allocated the required system resources even if they exceed the set read and write quotas, so as to achieve the maximum utilization of resources. In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

>     This feature provides a built-in Resource Control Dashboard in Grafana to show the actual usage of resources, assisting you to allocate resources more rationally. It also supports dynamic resource management capabilities based on session and statement levels (Hint). The introduction of these features will help you gain more precise control over the resource usage of your TiDB cluster, and dynamically adjust quotas based on actual needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This feature provides a built-in Resource Control Dashboard for the actual usage of resources in Grafana, assisting you to allocate resources more rationally. It also supports dynamic resource management capabilities based on both session and statement levels (Hint). The introduction of this feature will help you gain more precise control over the resource usage of your TiDB cluster, and dynamically adjust quotas based on actual needs.
```

* Support `ALTER TABLE…REORGANIZE PARTITION` [#15000](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/15000) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**

    TiDB supports the `ALTER TABLE...REORGANIZE PARTITION` syntax. Using this syntax, you can reorganize some or all of the partitions of a table, including merging, splitting, or other modifications, without losing data.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#reorganize-partitions).

* Support Key partitioning [#41364](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41364) @[TonsnakeLin](https://github.com/TonsnakeLin) **tw:qiancai**

    Now TiDB supports Key partitioning. Both Key partitioning and Hash partitioning can evenly distribute data into a certain number of partitions. The difference is that Hash partitioning only supports distributing data based on a specified integer expression or an integer column, while Key partitioning supports distributing data based on a column list, and partitioning columns of Key partitioning are not limited to the integer type.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#key-partitioning).

### DB operations

> *  TiCDC supports replicating change data to storage services (GA) [#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw:hfxsd**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* TiCDC supports replicating change data to storage services (GA) [#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw:hfxsd**
```

  
    TiCDC supports replicating changed data to Amazon S3, GCS, Azure Blob Storage, NFS, and other S3-compatible storage services. Storage services are reasonably priced and easy to use. If you are not using Kafka, you can use storage services. TiCDC saves the changed logs to a file and then sends it to the storage services instead. From the storage services, your own consumer program can read the newly generated changed log files periodically. Currently, TiCDC supports replicating changed logs in canal-json and CSV formats to the storage service.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage).

* TiCDC OpenAPI v2 GA @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy) **tw:hfxsd**

>     TiCDC provides OpenAPI v2. Compared to OpenAPI v1, OpenAPI v2 provides more complete support for replication tasks. The features provided by OpenAPI are a subset of [`cdc cli` tools](/ticdc/ticdc-manage-changefeed.md). You can use OpenAPI v2 to perform queries and operations on TiCDC clusters, such as getting TiCDC node status, checking cluster health status, and managing replication tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    TiCDC provides OpenAPI v2. Compared with OpenAPI v1, OpenAPI v2 provides more comprehensive support for replication tasks. The features provided by TiCDC OpenAPI are a subset of the [`cdc cli` tool](/ticdc/ticdc-manage-changefeed.md). You can query and operate TiCDC clusters via OpenAPI v2, such as getting TiCDC node status, checking cluster health status, and managing replication tasks.
```

   
    With this feature, you can combine multiple small and medium-sized applications from different systems into a single TiDB cluster. When the system workload is low, busy applications can still be allocated the required system resources even if they exceed the set read and write quotas, so as to achieve the maximum utilization of resources. In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

>     This feature provides a built-in view of the actual usage of resources, assisting you to allocate resources more rationally. It also supports dynamic resource management capabilities based on session and statement levels (Hint). The introduction of these features will help you gain more precise control over the resource usage of your TiDB cluster, and dynamically adjust quotas based on actual needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This feature provides a built-in Resource Control Dashboard in Grafana to show the actual usage of resources, assisting you to allocate resources more rationally. It also supports dynamic resource management capabilities based on session and statement levels (Hint). The introduction of these features will help you gain more precise control over the resource usage of your TiDB cluster, and dynamically adjust quotas based on actual needs.
```

* Support `ALTER TABLE…REORGANIZE PARTITION` [#15000](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/15000) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**

    TiDB supports the `ALTER TABLE...REORGANIZE PARTITION` syntax. Using this syntax, you can reorganize some or all of the partitions of a table, including merging, splitting, or other modifications, without losing data.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#reorganize-partitions).

* Support Key partitioning [#41364](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41364) @[TonsnakeLin](https://github.com/TonsnakeLin) **tw:qiancai**

    Now TiDB supports Key partitioning. Both Key partitioning and Hash partitioning can evenly distribute data into a certain number of partitions. The difference is that Hash partitioning only supports distributing data based on a specified integer expression or an integer column, while Key partitioning supports distributing data based on a column list, and partitioning columns of Key partitioning are not limited to the integer type.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#key-partitioning).

### DB operations

> *  TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to storage sinks (GA) [#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw:hfxsd**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to storage sinks (GA) [#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw:hfxsd**
```

> *  TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to storage sinks (GA) [#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw:hfxsd**
>   
>     TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to Amazon S3, GCS, Azure Blob Storage, NFS, and other S3-compatible storage services. Cloud storage is reasonably priced and easy to use. If you are not using Kafka, you can use storage sinks. TiCDC saves the changed logs to a file and then sends it to the storage system. From the storage system, the consumer program reads the newly generated changed log files periodically. The storage sink supports changed logs in the canal-json and CSV formats. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*  TiCDC supports replicating change data to storage services (GA) [#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw:hfxsd**
  
    TiCDC supports replicating changed data to Amazon S3, GCS, Azure Blob Storage, NFS, and other S3-compatible storage services. Storage services are reasonably priced and easy to use. If you are not using Kafka, you can use storage services. TiCDC saves the changed logs to a file and then sends it to the storage services. From the storage services, the consumer program reads the newly generated changed log files periodically. Currently, TiCDC supports synchronizing changed logs in canal-json and CSV formats to the storage service
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage).

* TiCDC OpenAPI v2 GA @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy) **tw:hfxsd**

>     TiCDC provides the OpenAPI v2 feature. Compared with OpenAPI v1, OpenAPI v2 provides full support for replication tasks. You can query and perform operations on TiCDC clusters via OpenAPI v2. The OpenAPI feature is a subset of the [`cdc cli` tool](/ticdc/ticdc-manage-changefeed.md). You can use OpenAPI to perform operations on TiCDC clusters, such as getting TiCDC node status, checking cluster health status, and managing synchronization tasks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    TiCDC provides OpenAPI v2. Compared with OpenAPI v1, OpenAPI v2 provides more comprehensive support for replication tasks. The features provided by TiCDC OpenAPI are a subset of the [`cdc cli` tool](/ticdc/ticdc-manage-changefeed.md). You can query and operate TiCDC clusters via OpenAPI v2, such as getting TiCDC node status, checking cluster health status, and managing replication tasks.
```

> * TiCDC OpenAPI v2 GA @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     TiCDC provides the OpenAPI v2 feature. Compared with OpenAPI v1, OpenAPI v2 provides full support for replication tasks. You can query and perform operations on TiCDC clusters via OpenAPI v2. The OpenAPI feature is a subset of the [`cdc cli` tool](/ticdc/ticdc-manage-changefeed.md). You can use OpenAPI to perform operations on TiCDC clusters, such as getting TiCDC node status, checking cluster health status, and managing synchronization tasks.
> 
>     For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-open-api-v2.md).
>   For more information, see [documentation](https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/13224).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* TiCDC OpenAPI v2 GA @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy) **tw:hfxsd**

    TiCDC provides OpenAPI v2. Compared to OpenAPI v1, OpenAPI v2 provides more complete support for replication tasks. The features provided by OpenAPI are a subset of [`cdc cli` tools](/ticdc/ticdc-manage-changefeed.md). You can use OpenAPI v2 to perform queries and operations on TiCDC clusters, such as getting TiCDC node status, checking cluster health status, and managing replication tasks.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-open-api-v2.md).
```

### Observability

* 功能标题 [#issue号](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    功能描述（需要包含这个功能是什么、在什么场景下对用户有什么价值、怎么用）

    For more information, see [documentation](链接).

### Security

* 功能标题 [#issue号](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    功能描述（需要包含这个功能是什么、在什么场景下对用户有什么价值、怎么用）

    For more information, see [documentation](链接).

### Data migration

> * The `LOAD DATA` statement integrates with TiDB Lightning, so you can use the `LOAD DATA` command to complete data import tasks that would otherwise be done using TiDB Lightning alone. [#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw:hfxsd**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The `LOAD DATA` statement integrates with TiDB Lightning, so you can use the `LOAD DATA` statement to complete data import tasks that used to rely only on TiDB Lightning [#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw:hfxsd**
```

>     Before integrating TiDB Lightning, the `LOAD DATA` statement could only be used to import data files located on the client side. If you wanted to import data from cloud storage, you had to rely on TiDB Lightning to do so. However, deploying TiDB Lightning separately would incur additional deployment and management costs. By integrating the TiDB Lightning logical import capability (TiDB Backend) into the `LOAD DATA` command, you can not only eliminate the deployment and management costs of TiDB Lightning, but also greatly extend the capabilities of the `LOAD DATA` statement with the TiDB Lightning features. Some examples of the enhanced functionality are as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Before integrating TiDB Lightning, the `LOAD DATA` statement could only import data files from the client side. If you wanted to import data from cloud storage, you had to rely on TiDB Lightning. However, deploying TiDB Lightning separately would incur additional deployment and management costs. By integrating the TiDB Lightning logical import capability (TiDB Backend) into the `LOAD DATA` statement, you can not only eliminate the deployment and management costs of TiDB Lightning, but also greatly extend the capabilities of the `LOAD DATA` statement with the TiDB Lightning features. Some examples of the extended functionality are as follows:
```

    - Supports importing data from Amazon S3 and Google Cloud Storage to TiDB. Supports importing multiple source files to TiDB in one go with wildcards.

>     - Support `DEFINED NULL BY` to define null.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Support using `DEFINED NULL BY` to define null.
```

>     - Support for source files in CSV, TSV, Parquet, and SQL (mydumper/dumpling) formats.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Support source files in CSV, TSV, Parquet, and SQL (mydumper/dumpling) formats.
```

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        - 优化 Data Migration（DM）检查下游数据库账号权限的前置检查项 [#issue](链接-待补充) @[maxshuang](https://github.com/maxshuang)

            在之前的版本，Data Migration 进行前置检查，检查用户提供的下游数据库账号是具备所需的权限时，是非必须通过项，现改为必须通过项，避免该账号权限不足导致任务失败。

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Lightning

        - TiDB Lightning local backend supports separating data import and index import to improve import speed and stability [#42132](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42132) @[gozssky](https://github.com/gozssky) **tw:hfxsd**

            TiDB Lightning adds the `add-index-by-sql` parameter. The default value is `false`, which means that TiDB Lightning still encodes the row data and index data into KV pairs before importing them into TiKV. If you set it to `true`, it creates indexes with the add index SQL statement after the data is imported in physical import mode (local backend). In this way, it can improve the speed and stability of importing data.

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiUP

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

## Bug fixes

+ TiDB

>     - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>     - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Author: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that TiFlash reports an error for generated columns during execution [#40663](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40663) @[guo-shaoge](https://github.com/guo-shaoge)
    - Fix the issue that TiDB might not be able to obtain statistics correctly when there is a time type [#41938](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41938) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)
    - Fix the issue that full index scans might cause errors when prepare plan cache is enabled [#42150](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42150) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678)
    - Fix the issue that `IFNULL(NOT NULL COLUMN, ...)` might return incorrect results [#41734](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41734) @[LittleFall](https://github.com/LittleFall)
    - Fix the issue that TiDB might produce incorrect results when all data in a partitioned table is in a single region [#41801](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41801) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)
    - Fix the issue that TiDB might produce incorrect results when different partitioned tables appear in a single SQL statement [#42135](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42135) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
    - Fix the issue that statistics auto-collection might not trigger correctly on a partitioned table after adding a new index to the partitioned table [#41638](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41638) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)
    - Fix the issue that TiDB might read incorrect column statistics information after collecting statistics twice in a row [#42073](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42073) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)
    - Fix the issue that IndexMerge might produce incorrect results when prepare plan cache is enabled [#41828](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41828) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990)
    - Fix the issue that IndexMerge might have goroutine leakage [#41605](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41605) @[guo-shaoge](https://github.com/guo-shaoge)
    - Fix the issue that non-BIGINT unsigned integers might produce incorrect results when compared with strings/decimals [#41736](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41736) @[LittleFall](https://github.com/LittleFall)
    - Fix the issue that killing a previous `ANALYZE` statement due to memory over-limit might cause the current `ANALYZE` statement in the same session to be killed [#41825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41825), @[XuHuaiyu](https://github.com/XuHuaiyu)
    - Fix the issue that data racing might occur during the information collection process of the batch coprocessor [41412](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41412) @[you06](https://github.com/you06)
    - Fix the issue that an assertion error prevents printing MVCC information for partitioned tables [#40629](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40629) @[ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium)
    - Fix the issue that fair lock mode adds locking to non-existent keys [#41527](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41527) @[ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium)
    - Fix the issue that `INSERT IGNORE` and `REPLACE` statements do not lock keys that do not modify values [#42121](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42121) @[zyguan](https://github.com/zyguan)
```

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiFlash

>     - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>     - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Author: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that Decimal division does not round up the last digit in certain cases [#7022](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7022) @[LittleFall](https://github.com/LittleFall)
    - Fix the issue that Decimal cast rounds up incorrectly in certain cases [#6994](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6994) @[windtalker](https://github.com/windtalker)
    - Fix the issue that TopN/Sort operators produce incorrect results after enabling the new collation [#6807](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6807) @[xzhangxian1008](https://github.com/xzhangxian1008)
    - Fix the issue that TiFlash reports an error when aggregating a result set larger than 12 million rows on a single TiFlash node [#6993](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6993) @[windtalker](https://github.com/windtalker)
```

    Before v7.0.0, TiFlash only supports the coupled storage and compute architecture. In this architecture, each TiFlash node acts as both storage and compute node, and its computing and storage capabilities cannot be independently expanded. In addition, TiFlash nodes can only use local storage.

    Starting from v7.0.0, TiFlash also supports the disaggregated storage and compute architecture. In this architecture, TiFlash nodes are divided into two types (Compute Nodes and Write Nodes) and support object storage that is compatible with S3 API. Both types of nodes can be independently scaled for computing or storage capacities. The **disaggregated storage and compute architecture** and  **coupled storage and compute architecture** cannot be used in the same cluster or converted to each other. You can configure which architecture to use when you deploy TiFlash.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md).

### Performance

* Achieve compatibility between Fast Online DDL and PITR [#38045](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38045) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth) **tw:ran-huang**

>     In TiDB v6.5.0, [Fast Online DDL](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) is not fully compatible with [PITR](/br/backup-and-restore-overview.md). To ensure full data backup, it is recommended to first stop the PITR background backup task, quickly add indexes using Fast Online DDL, and then resume the PITR backup task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In TiDB v6.5.0, [Fast Online DDL](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) is not fully compatible with [PITR](/br/backup-and-restore-overview.md). To ensure a full data backup, it is recommended to first stop the PITR background backup task, quickly add indexes using Fast Online DDL, and then resume the PITR backup task.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/tiflash/tiflash-supported-pushdown-calculations.md).

* TiFlash supports using FastScan (GA) [#5252](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5252) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan) **tw:Oreoxmt**

    Starting from v6.3.0, TiFlash introduces FastScan as an experimental feature. In v7.0.0, this feature becomes generally available. You can enable FastScan using the system variable [`tiflash_fastscan`](/system-variables.md#tiflash_fastscan-new-in-v630). By sacrificing strong consistency, this feature significantly improves table scan performance. If the corresponding table only involves `INSERT` operations without any `UPDATE`/`DELETE` operations, FastScan can keep strong consistency and improve the scan performance.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tiflash/use-fastscan.md).

* TiFlash supports late materialization [#5829](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5829) @[Lloyd-Pottiger](https://github.com/Lloyd-Pottiger) **tw:qiancai**

>     When processing a `SELECT` statement with filtering conditions (`WHERE` clause), TiFlash reads all the data from the columns required by the query by default, and then filters and aggregates the data based on the query conditions. Late materialization is an optimization method that supports pushing down part of the filtering conditions to the TableScan operator. That is, TiFlash first scans the column data related to the filtering conditions that are pushed down, filters the rows that meet the condition, and then scans the other column data of these rows for further calculation, thereby reducing IO scans and computations of data processing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    When processing a `SELECT` statement with filter conditions (`WHERE` clause), TiFlash reads all the data from the columns required by the query by default, and then filters and aggregates the data based on the query conditions. Late materialization is an optimization method that supports pushing down part of the filter conditions to the TableScan operator. That is, TiFlash first scans the column data related to the filter conditions that are pushed down, filters the rows that meet the condition, and then scans the other column data of these rows for further calculation, thereby reducing IO scans and computations of data processing.
```

>     The TiFlash late materialization feature is not enabled by default. You can enable it by setting the `tidb_opt_enable_late_materialization` system variable to `OFF`. When the feature is enabled, the TiDB optimizer will determine which filtering conditions to be pushed down based on statistics and filtering conditions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The TiFlash late materialization feature is not enabled by default. You can enable it by setting the `tidb_opt_enable_late_materialization` system variable to `OFF`. When the feature is enabled, the TiDB optimizer will determine which filter conditions to be pushed down based on statistics and filter conditions.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/tiflash/tiflash-late-materialization.md).

> * Support caching execution plans for non-Prepare statements (experimental) [#36598](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/36598) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw:Oreoxmt**

Author: ```suggestion
* Support caching execution plans for non-prepared statements (experimental) [#36598](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/36598) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw:Oreoxmt**
```

    The execution plan cache is important for improving the load capacity of concurrent OLTP and TiDB already supports [Prepared execution plan cache](/sql-prepared-plan-cache.md). In v7.0.0, TiDB can also cache execution plans for non-Prepare statements, expanding the scope of execution plan cache and improving the concurrent processing capacity of TiDB.

    This feature is disabled by default. You can enable it by setting the system variable [`tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache) to `ON`. For stability reasons, TiDB v7.0.0 allocates a new area for caching non-prepared execution plans and you can set the cache size using the system variable [`tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size). Additionally, this feature has certain restrictions on SQL statements. For more information, see [Restrictions](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md#restrictions).

>     For more information, see [documentation](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md).
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/tikv-configuration-file.md#prefill-for-recycle-new-in-v700).

* Support deriving the TopN or Limit operator from [window functions](/functions-and-operators/expressions-pushed-down.md) to improve window function performance [#13936](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13936) @[windtalker](https://github.com/windtalker) **tw:qiancai**

    This feature is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set the session variable [tidb_opt_derive_topn](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_derive_topn-new-in-v700) to `ON`.

    For more information, see [documentation](derive-topn-from-window.md).

* Support creating unique indexes through Fast Online DDL [#40730](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40730) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta) **tw:ran-huang**

    TiDB v6.5.0 supports creating ordinary secondary indexes via Fast Online DDL. TiDB v7.0.0 supports creating unique indexes via Fast Online DDL. Compared to v6.1.0, adding unique indexes to large tables is expected to be several times faster with improved performance.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ddl-introduction.md).

### Reliability

> * 支持基于资源组的资源管控 [#38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     TiDB 正式发布了基于资源组的资源管控特性，该特性将会极大地提升 TiDB 集群的资源利用效率和性能表现。资源管控特性的引入对 TiDB 具有里程碑的意义，它允许用户将一个分布式数据库集群划分成多个逻辑单元，将不同的数据库用户映射到对应的资源组中，并根据需要设置每个资源组的配额。当集群资源紧张时，来自同一个资源组的会话所使用的全部资源将被限制在配额内，避免其中一个资源组过度消耗，从而影响其他资源组中的会话正常运行。
> 
>     该特性也可以将多个来自不同系统的中小型应用合入一个 TiDB 集群中，个别应用的负载提升，不会影响其他应用的正常运行。而在系统负载较低的时候，繁忙的应用即使超过设定的读写配额，也仍然可以被分配到所需的系统资源，达到资源的最大化利用。此外，合理利用资源管控特性可以减少集群数量，降低运维难度及管理成本。
> 
>     我们不仅提供了内置视图展示资源的实际使用情况，协助用户更合理地配置资源，还支持基于会话和语句级别（HINT）的动态资源管控能力。这些功能的引入将帮助用户更精确地掌控 TiDB 集群的资源使用情况，并根据实际需要动态调整配额。
> 
>     启用资源管控特性需要同时打开 TiDB 的全局变量 [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-从-v660-版本开始引入) 及 TiKV 的配置项 [`resource-control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource-control)。当前支持的限额方式基于“[用量](/tidb-resource-control.md#什么是-request-unit-ru)”（Request Unit，即 RU），RU 是 TiDB 对 CPU、I/O 等系统资源的统一抽象单位。
> 
>     用户可以通过以下方式生效资源组：
> 
>     - 用户级别。通过 [`CREATE USER`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-user.md) 或 [`ALTER USER`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-alter-user.md) 语句将用户绑定到特定的资源组。将资源组绑定用户后，使用对应的用户创建的会话会自动绑定对应的资源组。
>     - 会话级别。通过 [`SET RESOURCE GROUP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-set-resource-group.md) 设置当前会话的资源组。
>     - 语句级别。通过 [`RESOURCE_GROUP()`](/optimizer-hints.md#resource_groupresource_group_name) 设置当前语句使用的资源组。

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* * Support resource control based on resource groups (GA) [#38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) **tw:hfxsd**

    TiDB 正式发布了基于资源组的资源管控特性。该特性将会极大地提升 TiDB 集群的资源利用效率和性能表现。资源管控特性的引入对 TiDB 具有里程碑的意义，你可以将一个分布式数据库集群划分成多个逻辑单元，将不同的数据库用户映射到对应的资源组中，并根据需要设置每个资源组的配额。当集群资源紧张时，来自同一个资源组的会话所使用的全部资源将被限制在配额内，避免其中一个资源组过度消耗，从而影响其他资源组中的会话正常运行。
    TiDB has officially released a resource management feature based on resource groups. This feature significantly improves the resource utilization efficiency and performance of TiDB clusters. The introduction of the resource control feature is a milestone for TiDB. You can divide a distributed database cluster into multiple logical units, map different database users to corresponding resource groups, and set the quota for each resource group as needed. When the cluster resources are limited, all resources used by sessions in the same resource group will be limited to the quota. In this way, even if a resource group is over-consumed, the sessions in other resource groups are not affected.      
   
    该特性也可以将多个来自不同系统的中小型应用合入一个 TiDB 集群中，个别应用的负载提升，不会影响其他应用的正常运行。而在系统负载较低的时候，繁忙的应用即使超过设定的读写配额，也仍然可以被分配到所需的系统资源，达到资源的最大化利用。此外，合理利用资源管控特性可以减少集群数量，降低运维难度及管理成本。
    With this feature, you can combine multiple small and medium-sized applications from different systems into a single TiDB cluster. When the workload of an application grows larger, it does not affect the normal operation of other applications. When the system workload is low, busy applications can still be allocated the required system resources even if they exceed the set read and write quotas, so as to achieve the maximum utilization of resources.     In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

    该特性不仅提供了内置视图展示资源的实际使用情况，协助你更合理地配置资源，还支持基于会话和语句级别（Hint）的动态资源管控能力。这些功能的引入将帮助你更精确地掌控 TiDB 集群的资源使用情况，并根据实际需要动态调整配额。
    This feature provides a built-in view of the actual usage of resources on Grafana dashboards, assisting you to allocate resources more rationally. It also supports dynamic resource management capabilities based on session and statement levels (Hint). The introduction of these features will help you gain more precise control over the resource usage of your TiDB cluster , and dynamically adjust quotas based on actual needs.
    
    TiDB supports three levels of resource group settings as follows.

    - User level. Bind the user using the [`CREATE USER`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-user.md) or [`ALTER USER`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-alter-user.md) statements to a specific resource group. After binding a resource group to a user, sessions created by the user are automatically bound to the corresponding resource group.
    - Session level. Set the resource group used by the current session via [`SET RESOURCE GROUP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-set-resource-group.md).
    - Statement level. Set the resource group used by the current statement via [`RESOURCE_GROUP()`](/optimizer-hints.md#resource_groupresource_group_name).

   For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md). 
```

  For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md).

* Support a checkpoint mechanism for Fast Online DDL, improving fault tolerance and automatic recovery capability [#42164](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42164) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta) **tw:ran-huang**

    TiDB v7.0.0 introduces a checkpoint mechanism for [Fast Online DDL](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630), which significantly improves its fault tolerance and automatic recovery capabilities. By periodically recording and synchronizing the DDL progress, ongoing DDL operations can continue to be executed in Fast Online DDL mode even if there is a TiDB DDL Owner failure or switch. This makes the execution of DDL more stable and efficient.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ddl-introduction.md).

* TiFlash supports spilling to disk [#6528](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6528) @[windtalker](https://github.com/windtalker) **tw:ran-huang**

>     To improve execution performance, TiFlash runs data entirely in memory as much as possible. When the amount of data exceeds the total size of memory, TiFlash terminates the query to avoid system crashes caused by running out of memory. Therefore, the amount of data that TiFlash can handle is limited by the available memory size.
> 
>     Starting from v7.0.0, TiFlash supports the spill-to-disk feature. By adjusting the threshold of memory usage for operators ([`tidb_max_bytes_before_tiflash_external_group_by`](/system-variables.md#tidb_max_bytes_before_tiflash_external_group_by-new-in-v700), [`tidb_max_bytes_before_tiflash_external_sort`](/system-variables.md#tidb_max_bytes_before_tiflash_external_sort-new-in-v700), and [`tidb_max_bytes_before_tiflash_external_join`](/system-variables.md#tidb_max_bytes_before_tiflash_external_join-new-in-v700)), you can control the maximum amount of memory that an operator can use. When the memory used by the operator exceeds the threshold, it automatically writes data to disk. This sacrifices some performance but allows for processing of more data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To improve execution performance, TiFlash runs data entirely in memory as much as possible. When the amount of data exceeds the total size of memory, TiFlash terminates the query to avoid system crashes caused by running out of memory. Therefore, the amount of data that TiFlash can handle is limited by the available memory.

    Starting from v7.0.0, TiFlash supports spilling to disk. By adjusting the threshold of memory usage for operators ([`tidb_max_bytes_before_tiflash_external_group_by`](/system-variables.md#tidb_max_bytes_before_tiflash_external_group_by-new-in-v700), [`tidb_max_bytes_before_tiflash_external_sort`](/system-variables.md#tidb_max_bytes_before_tiflash_external_sort-new-in-v700), and [`tidb_max_bytes_before_tiflash_external_join`](/system-variables.md#tidb_max_bytes_before_tiflash_external_join-new-in-v700)), you can control the maximum amount of memory that an operator can use. When the memory used by the operator exceeds the threshold, it automatically writes data to disk. This sacrifices some performance but allows for processing of more data.
```

* Add new optimizer hints for MPP optimization [#39710](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39710) @[Reminiscent](https://github.com/Reminiscent) **tw:ran-huang**

    In v7.0.0, TiDB adds a series of optimizer hints to influence the generation of MPP execution plans.

    - [`SHUFFLE_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#shuffle_joint1_name-tl_name): takes effect on MPP. It hints the optimizer to use the Shuffle Join algorithm for the specified table.
    - [`BROADCAST_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#broadcast_joint1_name-tl_name): takes effect on MPP. It hints the optimizer to use the Broadcast Join algorithm for the specified table.
    - [`MPP_1PHASE_AGG()`](/optimizer-hints.md#mpp_1phase_agg): takes effect on MPP. It hints the optimizer to use the one-phase aggregation algorithm for all aggregate functions in the specified query block.
    - [`MPP_2PHASE_AGG()`](/optimizer-hints.md#mpp_2phase_agg): takes effect on MPP. It hints the optimizer to use the two-phase aggregation algorithm for all aggregate functions in the specified query block.

>   MPP optimizer Hint can help you intervene in HTAP queries, improving performance and stability for HTAP workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  MPP optimizer hints can help you intervene in HTAP queries, improving performance and stability for HTAP workloads.
```

  For more information, see [documentation](/optimizer-hints.md).

> * Optimizer hints support specifying join methods and join orders [#36600](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/36600) @[Reminiscent](https://github.com/Reminiscent)
> 
>     In v7.0.0, the optimizer hint [`LEADING()`](/optimizer-hints.md#leadingt1_name--tl_name-) can be used in conjunction with hints that affect the join method, and their behaviors are compatible. In the case of multi-table joins, you can effectively specify the optimal join method and join order, thereby enhancing the control of optimizer hints over execution plans.
> 
>     The new Hint behavior has minor changes. To ensure forward compatibility, TiDB introduces the system variable [`tidb_opt_advanced_join_hint`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_advanced_join_hint-new-in-v700). When this variable is set to `OFF`, the optimizer hint behavior is compatible with earlier versions. When you upgrade your cluster from earlier versions to v7.0.0 or later versions, this variable will be set to `OFF`. To obtain more flexible hint behavior, after you confirm that the behavior does not bring about performance regression, it is strongly recommended to set this variable to `ON`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Optimizer hints support specifying join methods and join orders [#36600](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/36600) @[Reminiscent](https://github.com/Reminiscent)  **tw:ran-huang**

    In v7.0.0, the optimizer hint [`LEADING()`](/optimizer-hints.md#leadingt1_name--tl_name-) can be used in conjunction with hints that affect the join method, and their behaviors are compatible. In the case of multi-table joins, you can effectively specify the optimal join method and join order, thereby enhancing the control of optimizer hints over execution plans.

    The new hint behavior has minor changes. To ensure forward compatibility, TiDB introduces the system variable [`tidb_opt_advanced_join_hint`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_advanced_join_hint-new-in-v700). When this variable is set to `OFF`, the optimizer hint behavior is compatible with earlier versions. When you upgrade your cluster from earlier versions to v7.0.0 or later versions, this variable will be set to `OFF`. To obtain more flexible hint behavior, after you confirm that the behavior does not cause a performance regression, it is strongly recommended to set this variable to `ON`.
```

* Support `ALTER TABLE…REORGANIZE PARTITION` [#15000](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/15000) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw:qiancai**

    TiDB supports the `ALTER TABLE...REORGANIZE PARTITION` syntax. Using this syntax, you can reorganize some or all of the partitions of a table, including merging, splitting, or other modifications, without losing data.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#reorganize-partitions).

* Support Key partitioning [#41364](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41364) @[TonsnakeLin](https://github.com/TonsnakeLin) **tw:qiancai**

    Now TiDB supports Key partitioning. Both Key partitioning and Hash partitioning can evenly distribute data into a certain number of partitions. The difference is that Hash partitioning only supports distributing data based on a specified integer expression or an integer column, while Key partitioning supports distributing data based on a column list, and partitioning columns of Key partitioning are not limited to the integer type.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#key-partitioning).

### DB operations

> * TiCDC 支持 storage sink，可输出变更数据至 cloud storage (GA) [#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     TiCDC 支持将 changed log 输出到 Amazon S3、Azure Blob Storage、NFS，以及兼容 Amazon S3 协议的存储服务中。Cloud storage 价格便宜，使用方便。对于不使用 Kafka 的用户，可以选择使用 storage sink。使用该功能，TiCDC 会将 changed log 保存到文件，发送到存储系统中。用户自研的消费程序定时从存储系统读取新产生的 changed log 进行数据处理。
> 
>     Storage sink 支持格式为 canal-json 和 csv 的 changed log。
> 
>     For more information, see [documentation](https://docs.pingcap.com/zh/tidb/stable/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage).
> 
> * TiCDC Open API V2 GA @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     TiCDC 提供 OpenAPI 功能，用户可以通过 OpenAPI v2 对 TiCDC 集群进行查询和运维操作。OpenAPI 的功能是 [`cdc cli` 工具](/ticdc/ticdc-manage-changefeed.md)的一个子集。用户可以通过 OpenAPI 完成 TiCDC 集群的如下运维操作：
> 
>     - [获取 TiCDC 节点状态信息](#获取-ticdc-节点状态信息)
>     - [检查 TiCDC 集群的健康状态](#检查-ticdc-集群的健康状态)
>     - [创建同步任务](#创建同步任务)
>     - [删除同步任务](#删除同步任务)
>     - [更新同步任务配置](#更新同步任务配置)
>     - [查询同步任务列表](#查询同步任务列表)
>     - [查询特定同步任务](#查询特定同步任务)
>     - [暂停同步任务](#暂停同步任务)
>     - [恢复同步任务](#恢复同步任务)
>     - [查询同步子任务列表](#查询同步子任务列表)
>     - [查询特定同步子任务](#查询特定同步子任务)
>     - [查询 TiCDC 服务进程列表](#查询-ticdc-服务进程列表)
>     - [驱逐 owner 节点](#驱逐-owner-节点)
>     - [动态调整 TiCDC Server 日志级别](#动态调整-ticdc-server-日志级别)
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*  TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to storage sinks (GA) [#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw:hfxsd**
  
    TiCDC supports replicating changed logs to Amazon S3, GCS, Azure Blob Storage, NFS, and other S3-compatible storage services. Cloud storage is reasonably priced and easy to use. If you are not using Kafka, you can use storage sinks. TiCDC saves the changed logs to a file and then sends it to the storage system. From the storage system, the consumer program reads the newly generated changed log files periodically. The storage sink supports changed logs in the canal-json and CSV formats. 

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage).

* TiCDC OpenAPI v2 GA @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy) **tw:hfxsd**

    TiCDC provides the OpenAPI v2 feature. Compared with OpenAPI v1, OpenAPI v2 provides full support for replication tasks. You can query and perform operations on TiCDC clusters via OpenAPI v2. The OpenAPI feature is a subset of the [`cdc cli` tool](/ticdc/ticdc-manage-changefeed.md). You can use OpenAPI to perform operations on TiCDC clusters, such as getting TiCDC node status, checking cluster health status, and managing synchronization tasks.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-open-api-v2.md).
```

  For more information, see [documentation](https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/13224).

### Observability

* 功能标题 [#issue号](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    功能描述（需要包含这个功能是什么、在什么场景下对用户有什么价值、怎么用）

    For more information, see [documentation](链接).

### Security

* 功能标题 [#issue号](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    功能描述（需要包含这个功能是什么、在什么场景下对用户有什么价值、怎么用）

    For more information, see [documentation](链接).

### Data migration

> * Load data 语句集成 Lightning ，用户可以使用 Load data 命令完成原先需要单独使用 Lightning 才能完成的数据导入任务。    [#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     在集成 Lightning 之前，Load data 语句只能用于导入位于客户端的数据文件，如果用户要从云存储导入数据，就得借助 Lightning 来实现。但是单独部署 Lightning 又会带来额外的部署成本和管理成本。将 Lightning 逻辑导入能力（TiDB backend ）集成到 Load data 命令后，不仅可以省去 Lightning 的部署和管理成本。还可以借助 Lightning 的功能大大扩展 load data 语句的能力。 部分增强的功能举例说明如下：
> 
>     - 支持从 S3 导入数据到 TiDB，且支持通配符一次性匹配多个源文件导入到 TiDB 。
>     - 支持 CSV、TSV、Parquet、SQL(mydumper/dumpling) 格式的源文件。
>     - 支持 precheck ，可在导入之前将所有不满足导入数据的问题检测出来，用户根据检测结果优化后，再次提交任务。提升任务配置体验。
>     - 支持将任务设置为 Detached，让任务在后台执行。
>     - 支持任务管理，可通过 show load data jobid 查询任务状态和进展详情。方便用户管理和维护。
> 
>   For more information, see [documentation](待补充).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `LOAD DATA` statement integrates with TiDB Lightning, so you can use the `LOAD DATA` command to complete data import tasks that would otherwise be done using TiDB Lightning alone. [#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw:hfxsd**

    Before integrating TiDB Lightning, the `LOAD DATA` statement could only be used to import data files located on the client side. If you wanted to import data from cloud storage, you had to rely on TiDB Lightning to do so. However, deploying TiDB Lightning separately would incur additional deployment and management costs. By integrating the TiDB Lightning logical import capability (TiDB Backend) into the `LOAD DATA` command, you can not only eliminate the deployment and management costs of TiDB Lightning, but also greatly extend the capabilities of the `LOAD DATA` statement with the TiDB Lightning features. Some examples of the enhanced functionality are as follows:

    - Supports importing data from Amazon S3 and Google Cloud Storage to TiDB. Supports importing multiple source files to TiDB in one go with wildcards.
    - Support `DEFINED NULL BY` to define null.
    - Support for source files in CSV, TSV, Parquet, and SQL (mydumper/dumpling) formats.
    - Support setting tasks as `Detached` to let tasks run in the background.
    - Support task management. You can query task status and progress details by `SHOW LOAD DATA jobid`, which is convenient for management and maintenance.
    
    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-load-data.md).
```

    In v7.7.0, this feature becomes GA and is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set the `compress-kv-pairs` configuration item of TiDB Lightning to `"gzip"` or `"gz"`.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task).

## Compatibility changes

> **Note:**
>
> This section provides compatibility changes you need to know when you upgrade from v6.6.0 to the current version (v7.0.0). If you are upgrading from v6.5.0 or earlier versions to the current version, you might also need to check the compatibility changes introduced in intermediate versions.

### MySQL compatibility

* TiDB removes the constraint that the auto-increment column must be an index [#40580](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40580) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) **tw:ran-huang**

>     Starting from v7.0.0, TiDB removes the constraint that the auto-increment column must be an index or index prefix. Now you can define the primary key of a table more flexibly and use the auto-increment column to implement sorting and pagination more conveniently. This also avoids the write hotspot problem caused by the auto-increment column and improves query performance by using the table with clustered indexes. Previously, TiDB's behavior was consistent with MySQL, requiring the auto-increment column to be an index or index prefix. With the new release, you can create a table using the following syntax and successfully remove the auto-increment column constraint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Before v7.0.0, TiDB's behavior is consistent with MySQL, requiring the auto-increment column to be an index or index prefix. Starting from v7.0.0, TiDB removes the constraint that the auto-increment column must be an index or index prefix. Now you can define the primary key of a table more flexibly and use the auto-increment column to implement sorting and pagination more conveniently. This also avoids the write hotspot problem caused by the auto-increment column and improves query performance by using the table with clustered indexes. With the new release, you can create a table using the following syntax:
```

    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE test1 (
        `id` int(11) NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
        `k` int(11) NOT NULL DEFAULT '0',
        `c` char(120) COLLATE utf8mb4_unicode_ci NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
        PRIMARY KEY(`k`, `id`)
    );
    ```

    This feature does not affect TiCDC data replication.

    For more information, see [documentation](/mysql-compatibility.md#auto-increment-id).

* TiDB supports Key partitions, as shown in the following example: **tw:qiancai**

    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE employees (
    id INT NOT NULL,
    fname VARCHAR(30),
    lname VARCHAR(30),
    hired DATE NOT NULL DEFAULT '1970-01-01',
    separated DATE DEFAULT '9999-12-31',
    job_code INT,
    store_id INT) PARTITION BY KEY(store_id) PARTITIONS 4;
    ```

    Starting from v7.0.0, TiDB supports Key partitions and can parse the MySQL `PARTITION BY LINEAR KEY` syntax. However, TiDB ignores the `LINEAR` keyword and uses a non-linear hash algorithm instead. Currently, the `KEY` partition type does not support partition statements with an empty partition column list.

>     For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#key-partitioning)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#key-partitioning).
```

### TiCDC compatibility

> * TiCDC fixes the issue of incorrect encoding of Float data in Avro [#8490](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8490) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand) **tw:ran-huang**
> 
>     When upgrading the TiCDC cluster to v7.0.0, if a table replicated using Avro contains the Float data type, you need to manually adjust the compatibility policy of Confluent Schema Registry to `None` before upgrading so that the changefeed can successfully update the schema. Otherwise, after upgrading, the changefeed will be unable to update the schema and enter an error state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* TiCDC fixes the issue of incorrect encoding of `FLOAT` data in Avro [#8490](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8490) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand) **tw:ran-huang**

    When upgrading the TiCDC cluster to v7.0.0, if a table replicated using Avro contains the `FLOAT` data type, you need to manually adjust the compatibility policy of Confluent Schema Registry to `None` before upgrading so that the changefeed can successfully update the schema. Otherwise, after upgrading, the changefeed will be unable to update the schema and enter an error state.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/tikv-configuration-file.md#prefill-for-recycle-new-in-v700).

* Support deriving the TopN or Limit operator from [window functions](/functions-and-operators/expressions-pushed-down.md) to improve window function performance [#13936](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13936) @[windtalker](https://github.com/windtalker) **tw:qiancai**

    This feature is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set the session variable [tidb_opt_derive_topn](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_derive_topn-new-in-v700) to `ON`.

    For more information, see [documentation](derive-topn-from-window.md).

* Support creating unique indexes through Fast Online DDL [#40730](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40730) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta) **tw:ran-huang**

    TiDB v6.5.0 supports creating ordinary secondary indexes via Fast Online DDL. TiDB v7.0.0 supports creating unique indexes via Fast Online DDL. Compared to v6.1.0, adding unique indexes to large tables is expected to be several times faster with improved performance.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ddl-introduction.md).

### Reliability

> * * Support resource control based on resource groups (GA) [#38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>     TiDB officially releases the resource control feature based on resource groups. This feature significantly improves the resource utilization efficiency and performance of TiDB clusters. The introduction of the resource control feature is a milestone for TiDB. You can divide a distributed database cluster into multiple logical units, map different database users to corresponding resource groups, and set the quota for each resource group as needed. When the cluster resources are limited, all resources used by sessions in the same resource group are limited to the quota. In this way, even if a resource group is over-consumed, the sessions in other resource groups are not affected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* * Support resource control based on resource groups (experimental) [#38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) **tw:hfxsd**

    TiDB enhances the resource control feature based on resource groups. This feature significantly improves the resource utilization efficiency and performance of TiDB clusters. The introduction of the resource control feature is a milestone for TiDB. You can divide a distributed database cluster into multiple logical units, map different database users to corresponding resource groups, and set the quota for each resource group as needed. When the cluster resources are limited, all resources used by sessions in the same resource group are limited to the quota. In this way, even if a resource group is over-consumed, the sessions in other resource groups are not affected.
```

### System variables

| Variable name  | Change type    | Description |
|--------|------------------------------|------|
| `tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking` | Deleted | Renamed to [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_fair_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_fair_locking-new-in-v700). |
| [`tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache) | Modified | Takes effect starting from v7.0.0 and controls whether to enable the [Non-prepared plan cache](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md) feature. |
| [`tidb_enable_null_aware_anti_join`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_null_aware_anti_join-new-in-v630) | Modified | Changes the default value from `OFF` to `ON` after further tests, meaning that TiDB applies Null-Aware Hash Join when Anti Join is generated by subqueries led by special set operators `NOT IN` and `!= ALL` by default. |

> | [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) | Modified | The default value of this variable is changed from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the cluster isolates resources by resource group by default. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) | Modified | The default value of this variable is changed from `OFF` to `ON`, meaning that the cluster isolates resources by resource group by default. Resource Control is enabled by default in v7.0.0, so that you can use this feature whenever you want. |
```

| [`tidb_opt_ordering_index_selectivity_threshold`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_ordering_index_selectivity_threshold-new-in-v700) | Newly added | This variable controls how the optimizer selects indexes when the SQL statement contains `ORDER BY` and `LIMIT` clauses and have filtering conditions. |
| [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_fair_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_fair_locking-new-in-v700) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the enhanced pessimistic lock-waking model to reduce the tail latency of transactions under single-row conflict scenarios. The default value is `ON`. When the cluster is upgraded from an earlier version to v7.0.0 or later, the value of this variable is set to `OFF`. |
| [`tidb_ttl_running_tasks`](/system-variables.md#tidb_ttl_running_tasks-new-in-v700) | Newly added | This variable is used to limit the concurrency of TTL tasks across the entire cluster. The default value `-1` means that the TTL tasks are the same as the number of TiKV nodes. |

### Configuration file parameters

| Configuration file | Configuration parameter | Change type | Description |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |

> | TiKV | `server.snap-max-write-bytes-per-sec` | Deleted | Renamed to [`server.snap-io-max-bytes-per-sec`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#snap-io-max-bytes-per-sec). |

Author: ```suggestion
```

| [`tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size) | Modified | Takes effect starting from v7.0.0 and controls the maximum number of execution plans that can be cached by [Non-prepared plan cache](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md). |
| [`tidb_rc_read_check_ts`](/system-variables.md#tidb_rc_read_check_ts-new-in-v600) | Modified | Starting from v7.0.0, this variable is no longer effective for cursor fetch read in the prepared statement protocol. |
| [`tidb_enable_inl_join_inner_multi_pattern`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_inl_join_inner_multi_pattern-new-in-v700) | Newly added | This variable controls whether Index Join is supported when the inner table has `Selection` or `Projection` operators on it. |
| [`tidb_enable_plan_cache_for_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_cache_for_subquery-new-in-v700) | Newly added | This variable controls whether Prepared Plan Cache caches queries that contain subqueries. |

> | [tidb_enable_plan_replayer_continuous_capture](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_replayer_continuous_capture-new-in-v700) | Newly added | This variable controls whether to enable the [`PLAN REPLAYER CONTINUOUS CAPTURE` feature](/sql-plan-replayer.md#use-plan-replayer-continuous-capture). The default value `OFF` means to disable the feature. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_enable_plan_replayer_continuous_capture`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_replayer_continuous_capture-new-in-v700) | Newly added | This variable controls whether to enable the [`PLAN REPLAYER CONTINUOUS CAPTURE` feature](/sql-plan-replayer.md#use-plan-replayer-continuous-capture). The default value `OFF` means to disable the feature. |
```

| TiKV | [`raft-engine.enable-log-recycle`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#enable-log-recycle-new-in-v630) | Modified | Default value changed from `false` to `true`. |
| TiKV | [`resolved-ts.advance-ts-interval`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#advance-ts-interval) | Modified | Default value changed from `1s` to `20s`. This modification can increase the interval of the regular advancement of Resolved TS and reduce the traffic consumption between TiKV nodes. |
| TiKV | [`resource-control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource-control) | Modified | Default value changed from `false` to `true`. |
| TiKV | [`raft-engine.prefill-for-recycle`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#prefill-for-recycle-new-in-v700) | Newly added | Determines whether to generate empty log files for log recycling in Raft Engine. The default value is `false`. |
| PD | [`degraded-mode-wait-duration`](/pd-configuration-file.md#degraded-mode-wait-duration) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the waiting time for triggering the degraded mode. The default value is `0s`. |

> | PD | [`read-base-cost`](/pd-configuration-file.md#read-base-cost) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the coefficient for converting read requests to RU. The default value is `0.25`. |
> | PD | [`read-cost-per-byte`](/pd-configuration-file.md#read-cost-per-byte) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the coefficient for converting read traffic to RU. The default value is `1/ (64 * 1024)`. |
> | PD | [`read-cpu-ms-cost`](/pd-configuration-file.md#read-cpu-ms-cost) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the coefficient for converting CPU to RU. The default value is `1/3`. |
> | PD | [`write-base-cost`](/pd-configuration-file.md#write-base-cost) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the coefficient for converting write requests to RU. The default value is `1`. |
> | PD | [`write-cost-per-byte`](/pd-configuration-file.md#write-cost-per-byte) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the coefficient for converting write traffic to RU. The default value is `1/1024`. |

Author: ```suggestion
| PD | [`read-base-cost`](/pd-configuration-file.md#read-base-cost) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the basis factor for conversion from a read request to RU. The default value is `0.25`. |
| PD | [`read-cost-per-byte`](/pd-configuration-file.md#read-cost-per-byte) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the basis factor for conversion from read flow to RU. The default value is `1/ (64 * 1024)`. |
| PD | [`read-cpu-ms-cost`](/pd-configuration-file.md#read-cpu-ms-cost) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the basis factor for conversion from CPU to RU. The default value is `1/3`. |
| PD | [`write-base-cost`](/pd-configuration-file.md#write-base-cost) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the basis factor for conversion from a write request to RU. The default value is `1`. |
| PD | [`write-cost-per-byte`](/pd-configuration-file.md#write-cost-per-byte) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the basis factor for conversion from write flow to RU. The default value is `1/1024`. |
```

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        - 优化 Data Migration（DM）检查下游数据库账号权限的前置检查项 [#issue](链接-待补充) @[maxshuang](https://github.com/maxshuang)

            在之前的版本，Data Migration 进行前置检查，检查用户提供的下游数据库账号是具备所需的权限时，是非必须通过项，现改为必须通过项，避免该账号权限不足导致任务失败。

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Lightning

        - TiDB Lightning local backend supports separating data import and index import to improve import speed and stability [#42132](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42132) @[gozssky](https://github.com/gozssky) **tw:hfxsd**

            TiDB Lightning adds the `add-index-by-sql` parameter. The default value is `false`, which means that TiDB Lightning still encodes the row data and index data into KV pairs before importing them into TiKV. If you set it to `true`, it creates indexes with the add index SQL statement after the data is imported in physical import mode (local backend). In this way, it can improve the speed and stability of importing data.

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiUP

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

## Bug fixes

+ TiDB

> 

Author: ```suggestion
   - 修复 TiDB 从 v6.5.1 升级到新版本时遗漏掉一些更新的问题 [#41502](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41502) @[chrysan](https://github.com/chrysan)
    - 修复部分系统变量升级后默认值没有修改的问题 [#41423](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41423) @[crazycs520](https://github.com/crazycs520)
    - 修复加索引相关 coprocessor 请求类型显示的问题 [#41400](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41400) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - 修复加索引时返回未找到悲观锁的问题 [#41515](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41515) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - 修复加唯一索引时误返回 `duplicate key` 的问题 [#41630](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41630) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - 修复加索引时 panic 的问题 [#41880](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41880) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
```

Reviewer: L407:
```
    - Fix the issue that the default values of some system variables are not modified after upgrading [#41423](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41423) @[crazycs520](https://github.com/crazycs520)
```

Author: updated

    hired DATE NOT NULL DEFAULT '1970-01-01',
    separated DATE DEFAULT '9999-12-31',
    job_code INT,
    store_id INT) PARTITION BY KEY(store_id) PARTITIONS 4;
    ```

    Starting from v7.0.0, TiDB supports Key partitions and can parse the MySQL `PARTITION BY LINEAR KEY` syntax. However, TiDB ignores the `LINEAR` keyword and uses a non-linear hash algorithm instead. Currently, the `KEY` partition type does not support partition statements with an empty partition column list.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#key-partitioning).

### TiCDC compatibility

* TiCDC fixes the issue of incorrect encoding of `FLOAT` data in Avro [#8490](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8490) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand) **tw:ran-huang**

    When upgrading the TiCDC cluster to v7.0.0, if a table replicated using Avro contains the `FLOAT` data type, you need to manually adjust the compatibility policy of Confluent Schema Registry to `None` before upgrading so that the changefeed can successfully update the schema. Otherwise, after upgrading, the changefeed will be unable to update the schema and enter an error state.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

* In v7.0.0, the [`LOAD DATA`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-load-data.md) SQL statement adds the `batch_size` parameter to split transactions. The default value of the `batch_size` parameter is `1000`, which means that the data to be imported into TiDB is split into multiple transactions, and each transaction inserts up to 1000 rows of records into TiDB. Prior to v7.0.0, you can use the [`tidb_dml_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_dml_batch_size) system variable to control the transaction size, but this variable no longer takes effect on `LOAD DATA` starting from v7.0.0.

```

| DM | [`range-concurrency`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md#task-configuration-file-template-advanced)  | Newly added | Configure the concurrency of dm-worker writing KV data to TiKV. |
| DM | [`compress-kv-pairs`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md#task-configuration-file-template-advanced)  | Newly added | Configure whether to enable compression when dm-worker sends KV data to TiKV. Currently, only Gzip is supported. The default value is none, which means no compression. |
| DM | [`pd-addr`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md#task-configuration-file-template-advanced)  | Newly added | Configure the address of the downstream PD server when performing physical import. |
### Others

## Deprecated feature

## Improvements

+ TiDB

    - Introduce the `EXPAND` operator to optimize the performance of SQL queries with multiple `DISTINCT` in a single `SELECT` statement [#16581](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/16581) @[AilinKid](https://github.com/AilinKid)
    - Support more SQL formats for Index Join [#40505](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40505) @[Yisaer](https://github.com/Yisaer)

>     - Hints for Join order and Join algorithm can now be applied together [#36600](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/36600) @[Reminiscent](https://github.com/Reminiscent)

Author: dup with *feature details*
```suggestion
```

    - Avoid globally sorting partitioned table data in TiDB in some cases [#26166](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/26166) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)

>     - Add a new system variable `tidb_opt_ordering_index_selectivity_threshold` to help the optimizer to generate optimal execution plans for queries in the form of `WHERE filters on index_1 ORDER BY index_2` [#42060](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42060) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    - Support using `fair lock mode` and `lock only if exists` at the same time [#42068](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42068) @[MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)
    - Support printing transaction slow logs and transaction internal events [#41863](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41863) @[ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium)

>     - The enhanced pessimistic lock wake-up model (controlled by `tidb_pessimistic_txn_fair_locking`) is now enabled by default in newly created clusters. This can fairly wake up blocked transactions in scenarios where pessimistic transactions have severe single-point conflicts, thus achieving more stable transaction latency and lower tail latency [#42147](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42147) @[MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)

Author: ditto

>     - The enhanced pessimistic lock wake-up model (controlled by `tidb_pessimistic_txn_fair_locking`) is now enabled by default in newly created clusters. This can fairly wake up blocked transactions in scenarios where pessimistic transactions have severe single-point conflicts, thus achieving more stable transaction latency and lower tail latency [#42147](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42147) @[MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

+ TiFlash

    - Reduce TiFlash's memory usage on write path [#7144](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7144) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)
    - Reduce TiFlash's restart time in scenarios with many tables [#7146](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7146) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiCDC

        - Support distributing data changes of a single large table to multiple TiCDC nodes in scenarios where Kafka is the downstream, thus solving the scalability issue of single tables in data integration scenarios of large-scale TiDB clusters [#8247](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8247) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)

            You can enable this feature by setting the TiCDC configuration item `enable_table_across_nodes` to `true`, and you can use `region_threshold` to specify that only when the number of Regions for a table exceeds this threshold, TiCDC starts distributing data changes of the corresponding table to multiple TiCDC nodes.

>         - Support splitting transactions in redo applier to improve apply throughput and reduce RTO in disaster recovery scenarios [#8318](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8318) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)

Reviewer 2: 这里的 apply 直接用可能会有歧义，是否有更好的表达？
```suggestion
        - Support splitting transactions in the redo applier to improve apply throughput and reduce RTO in disaster recovery scenarios [#8318](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8318) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
```

Reviewer 3: 改成 improve its throughput?

    - Fix the issue that killing a previous `ANALYZE` statement due to memory over-limit might cause the current `ANALYZE` statement in the same session to be killed [#41825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41825), @[XuHuaiyu](https://github.com/XuHuaiyu)
    - Fix the issue that data racing might occur during the information collection process of the batch coprocessor [41412](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41412) @[you06](https://github.com/you06)
    - Fix the issue that an assertion error prevents printing MVCC information for partitioned tables [#40629](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40629) @[ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium)
    - Fix the issue that fair lock mode adds locking to non-existent keys [#41527](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41527) @[ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium)
    - Fix the issue that `INSERT IGNORE` and `REPLACE` statements do not lock keys that do not modify values [#42121](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42121) @[zyguan](https://github.com/zyguan)

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

>     - Fix the issue that the Region Scatter might cause uneven distribution of leader [#6017](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6017) @[HunDunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)

Author: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that the Region Scatter operation might cause uneven distribution of leaders [#6017](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6017) @[HunDunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)
```

    - Fix the issue that data race might occur when getting PD members during startup [#6069](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6069) @[rleungx](https://github.com/rleungx)
    - Fix the issue that data race might occur when collecting hotspot statistics [#6069](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6069) @[lhy1024](https://github.com/lhy1024)

>     - Fix the issue that switching placement rule might cause uneven distribution of leader [#6195](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6195) @[bufferflies](https://github.com/bufferflies)

Author: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that switching placement rule might cause uneven distribution of leaders [#6195](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6195) @[bufferflies](https://github.com/bufferflies)
```

    - Fix the issue that TiFlash reports an error when aggregating a result set larger than 12 million rows on a single TiFlash node [#6993](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6993) @[windtalker](https://github.com/windtalker)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - Fix the issue of insufficient wait time for splitting Region retry during the PITR recovery process [#42001](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42001) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
	- Fix the issue of recovery failure due to "memory is limited" error encountered during the PITR recovery process [#41983](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41983) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
	- Fix the issue that PITR log backup progress does not advance when PD nodes are down [#14184](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14184) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
	- Alleviate the issue that the latency of the PITR log backup progress increases when Region leadership migration occurs [#13638](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13638) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)

    + TiCDC

>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        
        - 支持在 Kafka 为下游的场景中将单个大表的数据变更分布到多个 TiCDC 节点，从而解决大规模 TiDB 集群的数据集成场景下单表扩展性的问题 [#8247](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8247) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)

            你可以通过设置 TiCDC 配置项 `enable_table_across_nodes` 为 `true` 来启用这个功能，并通过设置 `region_threshold` 来指定当一张表的 region 个数超过阀值时，TiCDC 开始将对应的表上的数据变更分布到多个 TiCDC 节点。

        - 支持在 redo applier 中拆分事务以提升 apply 吞吐，降低灾难场景的 RTO [#8318](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8318) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
        - 改进表的调度策略，可以将单个表更均匀地拆分到各个 TiCDC 节点上 [#8247](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8247) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
        - 在 MQ sink 中添加了 Large Row 监控指标 [#8286](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8286) @[hi-rustin](https://github.com/hi-rustin)
        - 在一个 Region 包含多个表的数据的场景下，减少了 TiKV 与 TiCDC 节点间的网络流量 [#6346](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6346) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
        - 将 Checkpoint TS 和 Resolved TS 的 P99 指标的面板移动到 Lag analyze 面板 [#8524](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8524) @[hi-rustin](https://github.com/hi-rustin)
        - 支持在 redo log 里 apply DDL 事件 [#8361](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8361) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
        - 支持根据上游写入吞吐来拆分调度表到 TiCDC 节点 [#7720](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7720) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
```

> 	- Fix the issue that PITR log backup progress does not advance when PD nodes are down [#14184](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14184) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	- Fix the issue that PITR log backup progress does not advance when a PD node is down [#14184](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14184) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
```

>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - 修复了 Kafka sink 使用 `canal-json` protocol 时，`FLOAT` 类型的数值精度丢失的问题 [#8490](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8490) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)
        - 修复了重启 changefeed 可能导致数据丢失或者 checkpoint 无法推进的问题 [#8242](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8242) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
        - 修复了 DDL sink 出现 data race 的问题 [#8238](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8238) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)
        - 修复了状态为 `stopped` 的 changefeed 可能会自动重启的问题 [#8330](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8330) @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy)
        - 修复了当所有 Kafka server 不可访问时会导致 TiCDC server panic 的问题 [#8523](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8523) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)
        - 修复了下游为 MySQL 且执行语句和 TiDB 行为不兼容时可能导致数据丢失的问题 [#8453](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8453) @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen)
        - 修复了 rolling upgrade 可能导致 TiCDC OOM 或者 checkpoint 卡住的问题 [#8329](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8329) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
        - 修复了 Kubernetes 上不能平滑升级 (graceful upgrade) TiCDC 集群的问题 [#8484](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8484) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
```

    - The enhanced pessimistic lock wake-up model (controlled by `tidb_pessimistic_txn_fair_locking`) is now enabled by default in newly created clusters. This can fairly wake up blocked transactions in scenarios where pessimistic transactions have severe single-point conflicts, thus achieving more stable transaction latency and lower tail latency [#42147](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42147) @[MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)

+ TiKV

    - note

+ PD

    - Add a new monitoring metric for scheduling failures due to the store limit [#6043](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6043) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch)

+ TiFlash

    - Reduce TiFlash's memory usage on write path [#7144](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7144) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)
    - Reduce TiFlash's restart time in scenarios with many tables [#7146](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7146) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiCDC

>         - TiCDC 在 v7.0.0 版本支持在 Kafka 为下游的场景中将单个大表的数据改变分布到多个 TiCDC 节点，从而解决用户在大规模 TiDB 集群的数据集成场景下的单表扩展性问题。
> 
>             用户可以通过设置 TiCDC 配置 `enable_table_across_nodes` 为 `true` 来启用这个功能，并通过设置`region_threshold` 来指定当一张表的 region 个数超过阀值时 TiCDC 开始将对应的表上的数据改变分布到多个 TiCDC 节点。
> 
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        - 支持在 Kafka 为下游的场景中将单个大表的数据变更分布到多个 TiCDC 节点，从而解决大规模 TiDB 集群的数据集成场景下单表扩展性的问题 [#8247](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8247) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)

            你可以通过设置 TiCDC 配置项 `enable_table_across_nodes` 为 `true` 来启用这个功能，并通过设置 `region_threshold` 来指定当一张表的 region 个数超过阀值时，TiCDC 开始将对应的表上的数据变更分布到多个 TiCDC 节点。

        - 支持在 redo applier 中拆分事务以提升 apply 吞吐，降低灾难场景的 RTO [#8318](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8318) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
        - 改进表的调度策略，可以将单个表更均匀地拆分到各个 TiCDC 节点上 [#8247](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8247) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
        - 在 MQ sink 中添加了 Large Row 监控指标 [#8286](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8286) @[hi-rustin](https://github.com/hi-rustin)
        - 在一个 Region 包含多个表的数据的场景下，减少了 TiKV 与 TiCDC 节点间的网络流量 [#6346](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6346) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
        - 将 Checkpoint TS 和 Resolved TS 的 P99 指标的面板移动到 Lag analyze 面板 [#8524](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8524) @[hi-rustin](https://github.com/hi-rustin)
        - 支持在 redo log 里 apply DDL 事件 [#8361](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8361) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
        - 支持根据上游写入吞吐来拆分调度表到 TiCDC 节点 [#7720](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7720) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
```

>     + TiDB Data Migration (DM)
> 
>         - 优化 Data Migration（DM）检查下游数据库账号权限的前置检查项 [#issue](链接-待补充) @[maxshuang](https://github.com/maxshuang)
> 
>             在之前的版本，Data Migration 进行前置检查，检查用户提供的下游数据库账号是具备所需的权限时，是非必须通过项，现改为必须通过项，避免该账号权限不足导致任务失败。
> 
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
> 
>     + TiDB Lightning
> 
>         - TiDB Lightning local backend supports separating data import and index import to improve import speed and stability [#42132](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42132) @[gozssky](https://github.com/gozssky) **tw:hfxsd**
> 
>             TiDB Lightning adds the `add-index-by-sql` parameter. The default value is `false`, which means that TiDB Lightning still encodes the row data and index data into KV pairs before importing them into TiKV. If you set it to `true`, it creates indexes with the add index SQL statement after the data is imported in physical import mode (local backend). In this way, it can improve the speed and stability of importing data.
> 
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    + TiDB Lightning
    
           - TiDB Lightning Physical Import Mode supports separating data import and index import to improve import speed and stability [#42132](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42132) @[gozssky](https://github.com/gozssky)

           Add the `add-index-by-sql` parameter. The default value is `false`, which means that TiDB Lightning encodes both row data and index data into KV pairs and import them into TiKV together. If you set it to `true`, it means that TiDB Lightning adds indexes via the `ADD INDEX` SQL statement after importing the row data to improve import speed and stability.

        - Add the `tikv-importer.keyspace-name` parameter. The default value is an empty string, which means TiDB Lightning automatically gets the key space name of the corresponding tenant to import data. If you specify a value, the specified key space name will be used to import data. This parameter provides flexibility in the configuration of TiDB Lightning when you import data to a multi-tenant TiDB cluster. [#41915](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41915) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu)

```

    - Fix the issue that TiFlash reports an error when aggregating a result set larger than 12 million rows on a single TiFlash node [#6993](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6993) @[windtalker](https://github.com/windtalker)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - Fix the issue of insufficient wait time for splitting Region retry during the PITR recovery process [#42001](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42001) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
	- Fix the issue of recovery failure due to "memory is limited" error encountered during the PITR recovery process [#41983](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41983) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
	- Fix the issue that PITR log backup progress does not advance when PD nodes are down [#14184](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14184) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
	- Alleviate the issue that the latency of the PITR log backup progress increases when Region leadership migration occurs [#13638](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13638) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)

    + TiCDC

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

>     + TiDB Data Migration (DM)
> 
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
> 
>     + TiDB Lightning
> 
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        - Fix the issue that when a DM worker node uses GCP Cloud Storage, due to too frequent breakpoints, the request frequency limit of GCP Cloud Storage is reached and the DM worker cannot write the data into GCP Cloud Storage, thus causing the full data loading failure [#8482](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8482) @[maxshuang](https://github.com/maxshuang)
        - Fix the issue that when multiple DM tasks replicate the same downstream data at the same time and all use the downstream metadata table to record the breakpoint information, the breakpoint information of all tasks is written to the same metadata table and use the same task ID [#8500](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8500) @[maxshuang](https://github.com/maxshuang)

    + TiDB Lightning

        - Fix the issue that when importing data using TiDB Lighting Physical Import Mode, if there is an `auto_random` column in the composite primary key of the target table, but the value of the column is not specified in the source data, the related column does not generate data automatically [#41454](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41454) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter)
        - Fix the issue that when importing data using TiDB Lightning Logical Import Mode, the import failed because the target cluster user does not have `CONFIG` permissions [#41915](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41915) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu)
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md).

* TiDB removes the execution plan cache constraint for subqueries [#40219](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40219) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw:Oreoxmt**

    TiDB v7.0.0 removes the execution plan cache constraint for subqueries. This means that the execution plan of SQL statements with subqueries can now be cached, such as `SELECT * FROM t WHERE a > (SELECT ...)`. This feature further expands the application scope of execution plan cache and improves the execution efficiency of SQL queries.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-prepared-plan-cache.md).

> * TiKV enables Raft log recycling by default [#14379](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14379) @[LykxSassinator](https://github.com/LykxSassinator) **tw:ran-huang**
> 
>     In v6.3.0, TiKV introduced the [Raft log recycling](/tikv-configuration-file.md#enable-log-recycle-new-in-v630) feature to reduce long-tail latency caused by write load. In v7.0.0, this feature is enabled by default.
> 
>     For more information, see [documentation](/tikv-configuration-file.md#enable-log-recycle-new-in-v630).
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

	- Fix the issue that PITR log backup progress does not advance when PD nodes are down [#14184](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14184) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
	- Alleviate the issue that the latency of the PITR log backup progress increases when Region leadership migration occurs [#13638](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13638) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)

    + TiCDC

        - Fix the issue that the numerical precision of the `FLOAT` type is lost when the Kafka sink uses the `canal-json` protocol [#8490](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8490) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)
        - Fix the issue that restarting the changefeed might cause data loss or that the checkpoint cannot advance [#8242](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8242) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
        - Fix the data race issue in DDL sink [#8238](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8238) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)

>         - Fix the issue that the changefeed with the `stopped` status might restart automatically [#8330](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8330) @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that the changefeed in the `stopped` status might restart automatically [#8330](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8330) @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy)
```

>         - Fix the issue that the TiCDC server panics when all downstream Kafka servers are down [#8523](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8523) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that the TiCDC server panics when all downstream Kafka servers are unavailable [#8523](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8523) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)
```

        - Fix the issue that data might be lost when the downstream is MySQL and the executed statement is incompatible with TiDB [#8453](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8453) @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen)
        - Fix the issue that rolling upgrade might cause TiCDC OOM or that the checkpoint gets stuck [#8329](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8329) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
        - Fix the issue that graceful upgrade for TiCDC clusters fails on Kubernetes [#8484](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8484) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

>         - Fix the issue that when a DM worker node uses GCP Cloud Storage, due to too frequent breakpoints, the request frequency limit of GCP Cloud Storage is reached and the DM worker cannot write the data into GCP Cloud Storage, thus causing the full data failing to load [#8482](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8482) @[maxshuang](https://github.com/maxshuang)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that when a DM worker node uses GCP Cloud Storage, due to too frequent breakpoints, the request frequency limit of GCP Cloud Storage is reached and the DM worker cannot write the data into GCP Cloud Storage, thus causing the full data to fail to load [#8482](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8482) @[maxshuang](https://github.com/maxshuang)
```

        - Fix the issue that when multiple DM tasks replicate the same downstream data at the same time and all use the downstream metadata table to record the breakpoint information, the breakpoint information of all tasks is written to the same metadata table and uses the same task ID [#8500](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8500) @[maxshuang](https://github.com/maxshuang)

    + TiDB Lightning

>         - Fix the issue that when importing data using Physical Import Mode, if there is an `auto_random` column in the composite primary key of the target table, but the value of the column is not specified in the source data, the related column does not generate data automatically [#41454](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41454) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that when Physical Import Mode is used for importing data, if there is an `auto_random` column in the composite primary key of the target table, but the value of the column is not specified in the source data, TiDB Lightning cannot generate data for the `auto_random` column automatically [#41454](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41454) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter)
```

>         - Fix the issue that when importing data using Logical Import Mode, the import fails due to lack of the `CONFIG` permission for the target cluster [#41915](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41915) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that when importing data using Logical Import Mode, the import fails due to lack of the `CONFIG` permission for the target cluster [#41915](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41915) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu)
```
```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that when Logical Import Mode is used for importing data, the import fails due to lack of the `CONFIG` permission for the target cluster [#41915](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41915) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu)
```

---
title: TiDB 7.0.0 Release Notes

> ---

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.0.0.
---
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#key-partitioning).

### DB operations

* TiCDC supports replicating change data to storage services (GA) [#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu)

    TiCDC supports replicating changed data to Amazon S3, GCS, Azure Blob Storage, NFS, and other S3-compatible storage services. Storage services are reasonably priced and easy to use. If you are not using Kafka, you can use storage services. TiCDC saves the changed logs to a file and then sends it to the storage services instead. From the storage services, your own consumer program can read the newly generated changed log files periodically. Currently, TiCDC supports replicating changed logs in canal-json and CSV formats to the storage service.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md).

> * TiCDC OpenAPI v2 GA [#8019](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8019) @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* TiCDC OpenAPI v2 (GA) [#8019](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8019) @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy)
```

---
title: TiDB 7.0.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.0.0.
---

# TiDB 7.0.0 Release Notes

> Release date: xx xx, 2023

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Release date: March 30, 2023
```

In v7.0.0-DMR, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Scalability and Performance<br/></td>
    <td>Session level non-prepared SQL plan cache (experimental)</td>
    <td>Support automatically reusing plan cache at the session level to reduce compilation and shorten the query time for the same SQL patterns without manually setting prepare statements in advance.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>TiFlash supports the disaggregated storage and compute architecture and S3 shared storage (experimental)</td>
    <td>TiFlash introduces a cloud-native architecture as an option:
      <ul>
        <li>Disaggregates TiFlash's compute and storage, which is a milestone for elastic HTAP resource utilization.</li>
        <li>Introduces S3-based storage engine, which can provide shared storage at a lower cost.</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Reliability and Availability<br/></td>
    <td>Resource control enhancement (experimental) </td>

>     <td>Support using resource groups to allocate and isolate resources for various applications or workloads within one cluster. In this release, TiDB adds support for different resource binding modes (user, session, and query level) and user-defined priorities. Additionally, you can also use commands to perform resource calibration (estimation for the whole resource amount).</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <td>Support using resource groups to allocate and isolate resources for various applications or workloads within one cluster. In this release, TiDB adds support for different resource binding modes (user, session, and statement levels) and user-defined priorities. Additionally, you can also use commands to perform resource calibration (estimation for the whole resource amount).</td>
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/tikv-configuration-file.md#prefill-for-recycle-new-in-v700).

* Support deriving the TopN or Limit operator from [window functions](/functions-and-operators/expressions-pushed-down.md) to improve window function performance [#13936](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13936) @[windtalker](https://github.com/windtalker)

    This feature is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set the session variable [tidb_opt_derive_topn](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_derive_topn-new-in-v700) to `ON`.

    For more information, see [documentation](/derive-topn-from-window.md).

* Support creating unique indexes through Fast Online DDL [#40730](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40730) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)

    TiDB v6.5.0 supports creating ordinary secondary indexes via Fast Online DDL. TiDB v7.0.0 supports creating unique indexes via Fast Online DDL. Compared to v6.1.0, adding unique indexes to large tables is expected to be several times faster with improved performance.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ddl-introduction.md).

### Reliability

> * Ehance the resource control feature (experimental) [#38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Enhance the resource control feature (experimental) [#38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp)
```

> * Support resource control based on resource groups (experimental) [#38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Ehance the resource control feature (experimental) [#38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp)
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-open-api-v2.md).

* [DBeaver](https://dbeaver.io/) v23.0.1 supports TiDB by default [#17396](https://github.com/dbeaver/dbeaver/issues/17396) @[Icemap](https://github.com/Icemap)

    - Provides an independent TiDB module, icon, and logo.
    - The default configuration supports [TiDB Cloud Serverless Tier](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/select-cluster-tier#serverless-tier-beta), making it easier to connect to Serverless Tier.
    - Supports identifying TiDB versions to display or hide foreign key tabs.
    - Supports visualizing SQL execution plans in `EXPLAIN` results.
    - Supports highlighting TiDB keywords such as `PESSIMISTIC`, `OPTIMISTIC`, `AUTO_RANDOM`, `PLACEMENT`, `POLICY`, `REORGANIZE`, `EXCHANGE`, `CACHE`, `NONCLUSTERED`, and `CLUSTERED`.
    - Supports highlighting TiDB functions such as  `TIDB_BOUNDED_STALENESS`, `TIDB_DECODE_KEY`, `TIDB_DECODE_PLAN`, `TIDB_IS_DDL_OWNER`, `TIDB_PARSE_TSO`, `TIDB_VERSION`, `TIDB_DECODE_SQL_DIGESTS`, and `TIDB_SHARD`.

  For more information, see [DBeaver documentation](https://github.com/dbeaver/dbeaver/wiki).

### Data migration

> * The `LOAD DATA` statement integrates with TiDB Lightning, so you can use the `LOAD DATA` statement to complete data import tasks that used to rely only on TiDB Lightning [#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `LOAD DATA` statement integrates with TiDB Lightning, so you can use the `LOAD DATA` statement to complete data import tasks that used to rely only on TiDB Lightning (experimental) [#40499](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40499) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716)
```

    With this feature, you can combine multiple small and medium-sized applications from different systems into a single TiDB cluster. When the workload of an application grows larger, it does not affect the normal operation of other applications. When the system workload is low, busy applications can still be allocated the required system resources even if they exceed the set read and write quotas, so as to achieve the maximum utilization of resources. In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

    This feature provides a built-in Resource Control Dashboard for the actual usage of resources in Grafana, assisting you to allocate resources more rationally. It also supports dynamic resource management capabilities based on both session and statement levels (Hint). The introduction of this feature will help you gain more precise control over the resource usage of your TiDB cluster, and dynamically adjust quotas based on actual needs.

> 
>     You can use resource groups in the following ways:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In TiDB v7.0.0, you can set the absolute scheduling priority (PRIORITY) for resource groups to guarantee that important services can get resources. It also extends the way to set resource groups.
    
    You can use resource groups in the following ways:
```

Reviewer 4: LGTM

    TiCDC supports replicating changed data to Amazon S3, GCS, Azure Blob Storage, NFS, and other S3-compatible storage services. Storage services are reasonably priced and easy to use. If you are not using Kafka, you can use storage services. TiCDC saves the changed logs to a file and then sends it to the storage services instead. From the storage services, your own consumer program can read the newly generated changed log files periodically. Currently, TiCDC supports replicating changed logs in canal-json and CSV formats to the storage service.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage).

* TiCDC OpenAPI v2 GA @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy) **tw:hfxsd**

    TiCDC provides OpenAPI v2. Compared with OpenAPI v1, OpenAPI v2 provides more comprehensive support for replication tasks. The features provided by TiCDC OpenAPI are a subset of the [`cdc cli` tool](/ticdc/ticdc-manage-changefeed.md). You can query and operate TiCDC clusters via OpenAPI v2, such as getting TiCDC node status, checking cluster health status, and managing replication tasks.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-open-api-v2.md).

> 

Author: ```suggestion

* DBeaver v23.0.1 supports TiDB by default [#17396](https://github.com/dbeaver/dbeaver/issues/17396) @[Icemap](https://github.com/Icemap) **tw:ran-huang**

    - Independent TiDB module, icon, and logo.
    - The default configuration supports [TiDB Cloud Serverless Tier](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/select-cluster-tier#serverless-tier-beta), making it easier to connect to Serverless Tier;
    - Supports identifying TiDB versions to display or hide foreign key tabs;
    - Supports visualizing Explain SQL plans.
    - Supports syntax highlighting for TiDB keywords such as `PESSIMISTIC`, `OPTIMISTIC`, `AUTO_RANDOM`, `PLACEMENT`, `POLICY`, `REORGANIZE`, `EXCHANGE`, `CACHE`, `NONCLUSTERED`, and `CLUSTERED`.
    - Supports function highlighting for TiDB functions such as  `TIDB_BOUNDED_STALENESS`, `TIDB_DECODE_KEY`, `TIDB_DECODE_PLAN`, `TIDB_IS_DDL_OWNER`, `TIDB_PARSE_TSO`, `TIDB_VERSION`, `TIDB_DECODE_SQL_DIGESTS `, and `TIDB_SHARD`.

  For more information, refer to [DBeaver documentation](https://github.com/dbeaver/dbeaver/wiki).

```

    When upgrading the TiCDC cluster to v7.0.0, if a table replicated using Avro contains the `FLOAT` data type, you need to manually adjust the compatibility policy of Confluent Schema Registry to `None` before upgrading so that the changefeed can successfully update the schema. Otherwise, after upgrading, the changefeed will be unable to update the schema and enter an error state.

* In v7.0.0, the [`LOAD DATA`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-load-data.md) SQL statement adds the `batch_size` parameter to split transactions. The default value of the `batch_size` parameter is `1000`, which means that the data to be imported into TiDB is split into multiple transactions, and each transaction inserts up to 1000 rows of records into TiDB. Prior to v7.0.0, you can use the [`tidb_dml_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_dml_batch_size) system variable to control the transaction size, but this variable no longer takes effect on `LOAD DATA` starting from v7.0.0.

### System variables

| Variable name  | Change type    | Description |
|--------|------------------------------|------|

> | `tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking` | Deleted | Renamed to [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_fair_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_fair_locking-new-in-v700). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking` | Deleted | This variable is renamed to [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_fair_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_fair_locking-new-in-v700). |
```

    - Fix the issue that TiFlash reports an error when aggregating a result set larger than 12 million rows on a single TiFlash node [#6993](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6993) @[windtalker](https://github.com/windtalker)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - Fix the issue of insufficient wait time for splitting Region retry during the PITR recovery process [#42001](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42001) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
	- Fix the issue of recovery failure due to "memory is limited" error encountered during the PITR recovery process [#41983](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41983) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
	- Fix the issue that PITR log backup progress does not advance when PD nodes are down [#14184](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14184) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
	- Alleviate the issue that the latency of the PITR log backup progress increases when Region leadership migration occurs [#13638](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13638) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)

    + TiCDC

>         - Fix the issue that the numerical precision of the `FLOAT` type is lost when the Kafka sink uses the `canal-json` protocol [#8490](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8490) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage).

* TiCDC OpenAPI v2 GA @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy) **tw:hfxsd**

    TiCDC provides OpenAPI v2. Compared with OpenAPI v1, OpenAPI v2 provides more comprehensive support for replication tasks. The features provided by TiCDC OpenAPI are a subset of the [`cdc cli` tool](/ticdc/ticdc-manage-changefeed.md). You can query and operate TiCDC clusters via OpenAPI v2, such as getting TiCDC node status, checking cluster health status, and managing replication tasks.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-open-api-v2.md).

* DBeaver v23.0.1 supports TiDB by default [#17396](https://github.com/dbeaver/dbeaver/issues/17396) @[Icemap](https://github.com/Icemap) **tw:ran-huang**

>     - Independent TiDB module, icon, and logo.
>     - The default configuration supports [TiDB Cloud Serverless Tier](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/select-cluster-tier#serverless-tier-beta), making it easier to connect to Serverless Tier;
>     - Supports identifying TiDB versions to display or hide foreign key tabs;
>     - Supports visualizing Explain SQL plans.
>     - Supports syntax highlighting for TiDB keywords such as `PESSIMISTIC`, `OPTIMISTIC`, `AUTO_RANDOM`, `PLACEMENT`, `POLICY`, `REORGANIZE`, `EXCHANGE`, `CACHE`, `NONCLUSTERED`, and `CLUSTERED`.
>     - Supports function highlighting for TiDB functions such as  `TIDB_BOUNDED_STALENESS`, `TIDB_DECODE_KEY`, `TIDB_DECODE_PLAN`, `TIDB_IS_DDL_OWNER`, `TIDB_PARSE_TSO`, `TIDB_VERSION`, `TIDB_DECODE_SQL_DIGESTS `, and `TIDB_SHARD`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Provides an independent TiDB module, icon, and logo.
    - The default configuration supports [TiDB Cloud Serverless Tier](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/select-cluster-tier#serverless-tier-beta), making it easier to connect to Serverless Tier.
    - Supports identifying TiDB versions to display or hide foreign key tabs.
    - Supports visualizing SQL execution plans in `EXPLAIN` results.
    - Supports highlighting TiDB keywords such as `PESSIMISTIC`, `OPTIMISTIC`, `AUTO_RANDOM`, `PLACEMENT`, `POLICY`, `REORGANIZE`, `EXCHANGE`, `CACHE`, `NONCLUSTERED`, and `CLUSTERED`.
    - Supports highlighting TiDB functions such as  `TIDB_BOUNDED_STALENESS`, `TIDB_DECODE_KEY`, `TIDB_DECODE_PLAN`, `TIDB_IS_DDL_OWNER`, `TIDB_PARSE_TSO`, `TIDB_VERSION`, `TIDB_DECODE_SQL_DIGESTS `, and `TIDB_SHARD`.
```

>   For more information, refer to [DBeaver documentation](https://github.com/dbeaver/dbeaver/wiki).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  For more information, see [DBeaver documentation](https://github.com/dbeaver/dbeaver/wiki).
```

| TiCDC      | [`region-threshold`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#changefeed-configuration-parameters) | Newly added | When `enable-table-across-nodes` is enabled, this feature only takes effect on tables with more than `region-threshold` Regions.      |
| DM | [`analyze`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md#task-configuration-file-template-advanced)  | Newly added | Controls whether to execute the `ANALYZE TABLE <table>` operation on each table after CHECKSUM is completed. It can be configured as `"required"`/`"optional"`/`"off"`. The default value is `"optional"`. |
| DM | [`range-concurrency`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md#task-configuration-file-template-advanced)  | Newly added | Controls the concurrency of dm-worker writing KV data to TiKV. |
| DM | [`compress-kv-pairs`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md#task-configuration-file-template-advanced)  | Newly added | Controls whether to enable compression when dm-worker sends KV data to TiKV. Currently, only gzip is supported. The default value is empty, which means no compression. |

> | DM | [`pd-addr`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md#task-configuration-file-template-advanced)  | Newly added | Controls the address of the downstream PD server in the Physical Import mode. |

Author: ```suggestion
| DM | [`pd-addr`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md#task-configuration-file-template-advanced)  | Newly added | Controls the address of the downstream PD server in the Physical Import mode. You can fill in either one or more PD servers. If this configuration item is empty, use the PD address information from the TiDB query by default. |
```

In v7.0.0-DMR, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Scalability and Performance<br/></td>
    <td>Session level non-prepared SQL plan cache (experimental)</td>
    <td>Support automatically reusing plan cache at the session level to reduce compilation and shorten the query time for the same SQL patterns without manually setting prepare statements in advance.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>TiFlash supports the disaggregated storage and compute architecture and S3 shared storage (experimental)</td>
    <td>TiFlash introduces a cloud-native architecture as an option:
      <ul>
        <li>Disaggregates TiFlash's compute and storage, which is a milestone for elastic HTAP resource utilization.</li>
        <li>Introduces S3-based storage engine, which can provide shared storage at a lower cost.</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Reliability and Availability<br/></td>

>     <td>Resource control enhancement (Experimental) </td>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <td>Resource control enhancement (experimental) </td>
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md).

### Performance

* Achieve compatibility between Fast Online DDL and PITR [#38045](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38045) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth) **tw:ran-huang**

    In TiDB v6.5.0, [Fast Online DDL](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_enable_fast_reorg-new-in-v630) is not fully compatible with [PITR](/br/backup-and-restore-overview.md). To ensure a full data backup, it is recommended to first stop the PITR background backup task, quickly add indexes using Fast Online DDL, and then resume the PITR backup task.

    Starting from TiDB v7.0.0, Fast Online DDL and PITR are fully compatible. When restoring cluster data through PITR, the index operations added via Fast Online DDL during log backup will be automatically replayed to achieve compatibility.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ddl-introduction.md).

* TiFlash supports null-aware semi join and null-aware anti semi join operators [#6674](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6674) @[gengliqi](https://github.com/gengliqi) **tw:Oreoxmt**

>     When using `IN`, `NOT IN`, `= ANY`, or `!= ALL` operators in correlated subqueries, TiDB optimizes the computing performance by converting them to semi join or anti semi join. If the join key column might be `NULL`, a null-aware join algorithm is required, such as [Null-aware semi join](/explain-subqueries.md#null-aware-semi-join-in-and--any-subqueries) and [Null-aware anti semi join](/explain-subqueries#null-aware-anti-semi-join-not-in-and--all-subqueries).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    When using `IN`, `NOT IN`, `= ANY`, or `!= ALL` operators in correlated subqueries, TiDB optimizes the computing performance by converting them to semi join or anti semi join. If the join key column might be `NULL`, a null-aware join algorithm is required, such as [Null-aware semi join](/explain-subqueries.md#null-aware-semi-join-in-and--any-subqueries) and [Null-aware anti semi join](/explain-subqueries.md#null-aware-anti-semi-join-not-in-and--all-subqueries).
```

    In v7.0.0, a new configuration item called `raft-engine.prefill-for-recycle` was introduced to improve user experience. This item controls whether empty log files are generated for recycling when the process starts. When this configuration is enabled, TiKV automatically fills a batch of empty log files during initialization, ensuring that log recycling takes effect immediately after initialization.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tikv-configuration-file.md#prefill-for-recycle-new-in-v700).

* Support deriving the TopN or Limit operator from [window functions](/functions-and-operators/expressions-pushed-down.md) to improve window function performance [#13936](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13936) @[windtalker](https://github.com/windtalker) **tw:qiancai**

    This feature is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set the session variable [tidb_opt_derive_topn](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_derive_topn-new-in-v700) to `ON`.

>     For more information, see [documentation](derive-topn-from-window.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/derive-topn-from-window.md).
```

    With this feature, you can combine multiple small and medium-sized applications from different systems into a single TiDB cluster. When the workload of an application grows larger, it does not affect the normal operation of other applications. When the system workload is low, busy applications can still be allocated the required system resources even if they exceed the set read and write quotas, so as to achieve the maximum utilization of resources. In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

    This feature provides a built-in Resource Control Dashboard for the actual usage of resources in Grafana, assisting you to allocate resources more rationally. It also supports dynamic resource management capabilities based on both session and statement levels (Hint). The introduction of this feature will help you gain more precise control over the resource usage of your TiDB cluster, and dynamically adjust quotas based on actual needs.

>     In TiDB v7.0.0, you can set the absolute scheduling priority (PRIORITY) for resource groups to guarantee that important services can get resources. It also extends the way to set resource groups.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

    In TiDB v7.0.0, you can set the absolute scheduling priority (PRIORITY) for resource groups to guarantee that important services can get resources. It also extends the way to set resource groups.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#key-partitioning).

### DB operations

* TiCDC supports replicating change data to storage services (GA) [#6797](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6797) @[zhaoxinyu](https://github.com/zhaoxinyu) **tw:hfxsd**

    TiCDC supports replicating changed data to Amazon S3, GCS, Azure Blob Storage, NFS, and other S3-compatible storage services. Storage services are reasonably priced and easy to use. If you are not using Kafka, you can use storage services. TiCDC saves the changed logs to a file and then sends it to the storage services instead. From the storage services, your own consumer program can read the newly generated changed log files periodically. Currently, TiCDC supports replicating changed logs in canal-json and CSV formats to the storage service.

>     For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-cloud-storage.md).
```

> * TiCDC OpenAPI v2 GA @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy) **tw:hfxsd**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* TiCDC OpenAPI v2 GA [#8019](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8019) @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy) **tw:hfxsd**
```

| PD | [`read-cost-per-byte`](/pd-configuration-file.md#read-cost-per-byte) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the basis factor for conversion from read flow to RU. The default value is `1/ (64 * 1024)`. |
| PD | [`read-cpu-ms-cost`](/pd-configuration-file.md#read-cpu-ms-cost) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the basis factor for conversion from CPU to RU. The default value is `1/3`. |
| PD | [`write-base-cost`](/pd-configuration-file.md#write-base-cost) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the basis factor for conversion from a write request to RU. The default value is `1`. |
| PD | [`write-cost-per-byte`](/pd-configuration-file.md#write-cost-per-byte) | Newly added | A [Resource Control](/tidb-resource-control.md)-related configuration item. It controls the basis factor for conversion from write flow to RU. The default value is `1/1024`. |

> | TiFlash | [`flash.disaggregated_mode`](tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | In the disaggregated architecture of TiFlash, it indicates whether this TiFlash node is a write node or a compute node. The value can be `tiflash_write` or `tiflash_compute`. |
> | TiFlash | [`storage.s3.endpoint`](tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | The endpoint to connect to S3. |
> | TiFlash | [`storage.s3.bucket`](tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | The bucket where TiFlash stores all data. |
> | TiFlash | [`storage.s3.root`](tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | The root directory of data storage in S3 bucket. |
> | TiFlash | [`storage.s3.access_key_id`](tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | `ACCESS_KEY_ID` for accessing S3. |
> | TiFlash | [`storage.s3.secret_access_key`](tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | `SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` for accessing S3. |
> | TiFlash | [`storage.remote.cache.dir`](tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | The local data cache directory of TiFlash compute node. |
> | TiFlash | [`storage.remote.cache.capacity`](tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | The size of the local data cache directory of TiFlash compute node. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| TiFlash | [`flash.disaggregated_mode`](/tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | In the disaggregated architecture of TiFlash, it indicates whether this TiFlash node is a write node or a compute node. The value can be `tiflash_write` or `tiflash_compute`. |
| TiFlash | [`storage.s3.endpoint`](/tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | The endpoint to connect to S3. |
| TiFlash | [`storage.s3.bucket`](/tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | The bucket where TiFlash stores all data. |
| TiFlash | [`storage.s3.root`](/tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | The root directory of data storage in S3 bucket. |
| TiFlash | [`storage.s3.access_key_id`](/tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | `ACCESS_KEY_ID` for accessing S3. |
| TiFlash | [`storage.s3.secret_access_key`](/tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | `SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` for accessing S3. |
| TiFlash | [`storage.remote.cache.dir`](/tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | The local data cache directory of TiFlash compute node. |
| TiFlash | [`storage.remote.cache.capacity`](/tiflash/tiflash-disaggregated-and-s3.md) | Newly added | The size of the local data cache directory of TiFlash compute node. |
```

> | TiDB Lightning | [`add-index-by-sql`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task) | Newly added | Controls whether to use SQL to add indexes in physical import mode. The default value is automatically selected according to the TiDB version. The advantage of adding indexes using SQL is to separate the import of data and the import of indexes, which can quickly import data. Even if the index creation fails after the data is imported, the data consistency is not affected. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| TiDB Lightning | [`add-index-by-sql`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task) | Newly added | Controls whether to use SQL to add indexes in physical import mode. The default value is `false`, which means that TiDB Lightning will encode both row data and index data into KV pairs and import them into TiKV together. The advantage of adding indexes using SQL is to separate the import of data and the import of indexes, which can quickly import data. Even if the index creation fails after the data is imported, the data consistency is not affected. |
```

    - Fix the issue that `IFNULL(NOT NULL COLUMN, ...)` might return incorrect results [#41734](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41734) @[LittleFall](https://github.com/LittleFall)
    - Fix the issue that TiDB might produce incorrect results when all data in a partitioned table is in a single Region [#41801](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41801) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)
    - Fix the issue that TiDB might produce incorrect results when different partitioned tables appear in a single SQL statement [#42135](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42135) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
    - Fix the issue that statistics auto-collection might not trigger correctly on a partitioned table after adding a new index to the partitioned table [#41638](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41638) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)
    - Fix the issue that TiDB might read incorrect column statistics information after collecting statistics twice in a row [#42073](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42073) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)

>     - Fix the issue that IndexMerge might produce incorrect results when prepare plan cache is enabled [#41828](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41828) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that IndexMerge might produce incorrect results when prepared plan cache is enabled [#41828](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41828) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990)
```

        - Fix the data race issue in DDL sink [#8238](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8238) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)
        - Fix the issue that the changefeed in the `stopped` status might restart automatically [#8330](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8330) @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy)
        - Fix the issue that the TiCDC server panics when all downstream Kafka servers are unavailable [#8523](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8523) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)
        - Fix the issue that data might be lost when the downstream is MySQL and the executed statement is incompatible with TiDB [#8453](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8453) @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen)
        - Fix the issue that rolling upgrade might cause TiCDC OOM or that the checkpoint gets stuck [#8329](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8329) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
        - Fix the issue that graceful upgrade for TiCDC clusters fails on Kubernetes [#8484](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8484) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

>         - Fix the issue that when a DM worker node uses GCP Cloud Storage, due to too frequent breakpoints, the request frequency limit of GCP Cloud Storage is reached and the DM worker cannot write the data into GCP Cloud Storage, thus causing the full data to fail to load [#8482](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8482) @[maxshuang](https://github.com/maxshuang)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that when a DM worker node uses Google Cloud Storage, due to too frequent breakpoints, the request frequency limit of Google Cloud Storage is reached and the DM worker cannot write the data into Google Cloud Storage, thus causing the full data to fail to load [#8482](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8482) @[maxshuang](https://github.com/maxshuang)
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/tiflash/tiflash-supported-pushdown-calculations.md).

* TiFlash supports using FastScan (GA) [#5252](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5252) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan) **tw:Oreoxmt**

    Starting from v6.3.0, TiFlash introduces FastScan as an experimental feature. In v7.0.0, this feature becomes generally available. You can enable FastScan using the system variable [`tiflash_fastscan`](/system-variables.md#tiflash_fastscan-new-in-v630). By sacrificing strong consistency, this feature significantly improves table scan performance. If the corresponding table only involves `INSERT` operations without any `UPDATE`/`DELETE` operations, FastScan can keep strong consistency and improve the scan performance.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tiflash/use-fastscan.md).

> * TiFlash supports late materialization [#5829](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5829) @[Lloyd-Pottiger](https://github.com/Lloyd-Pottiger) **tw:qiancai**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* TiFlash supports late materialization (experimental) [#5829](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5829) @[Lloyd-Pottiger](https://github.com/Lloyd-Pottiger) **tw:qiancai**
```
